#Abstract attempt 2

The northern hemisphere is home to vast coniferous forests, and the ranges of many species in these forests encompass remarkably diverse climates.
Despite high levels of gene flow due to wind-dispersed pollen, adaptation to local climates is common. Phenological traits like budburst and budset have been studied extensively due to their influence on growth and survival. However, pollination phenology is less studied in conifers, despite its influence on fecundity, adaptation, and range limits, and its potential role in the creation and maintainance of local adaptation.

*Pinus contorta* spp. *latifolia* (lodgepole pine) is a widespread, wind-pollinated conifer species with local adaptation across its range. In this study, we model the relationship between temperature and pollination phenology in lodgepole pine, then calculate shifts in pollination phenology and length of phenological period under different warming scenarios.

Using pollination phenology data from trees grown at 8 sites over 15 years and sourced from across British Columbia with climate data from local weather stations, we construct a hierarchical Bayesian model predicting the timing and length of pollen shed and cone receptivity period and accounting for population source. We then extend the predictions across the entire range of lodgepole pine in the present and under three climate change scenarios.

While fall phenological traits like budset in lodgepole pine show strong signals of local adaptation, bud burst in the spring does not. In keeping with these results, we find that there is no significant genetic effect on pollination phenology and only heat sum is required for prediction.
Applying our model across the species range shows strong spatial patterns in pollination phenology that may create and maintain local adaptation. A
s temperatures warm, the pollination phenology period advances and shortens, desynchronizing populations and restricting gene flow. Pollen shed advances more rapidly than receptivity, especially in southern populations, which may lead some populations to become pollen limited and increase outcrossing.

In conclusion, lodgepole pine pollination phenology is driven by temperature and, as climate changes, the timing, length, and synchronization of pollen shed and cone receptivity is likely to shift with implications for evolution and conservation.